====================
Queryable Encryption
====================

.. versionadded:: 6.0.1

:doc:`manual:core/queryable-encryption` is a powerful MongoDB feature that
allows you to encrypt sensitive fields in your database while still supporting
queries on that encrypted data.

This section will guide you through the process of configuring Queryable
Encryption in your Django project.

.. admonition:: MongoDB requirements

    Queryable Encryption can be used with MongoDB replica sets or sharded
    clusters running version 7.0 or later. Standalone instances are not
    supported. The :ref:`manual:qe-compatibility-reference` table summarizes
    which MongoDB server products support Queryable Encryption.

Installation
============

In addition to Django MongoDB Backend's regular :doc:`installation
</intro/install>` and :doc:`configuration </intro/configure>` steps, Queryable
Encryption requires installing additional Python dependencies:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install 'django-mongodb-backend[encryption]'

You'll also have to download the :ref:`Automatic Encryption Shared Library
<manual:qe-csfle-shared-library-download>`. You can choose the latest version,
even if it doesn't match your MongoDB server version. Extract the shared
library from the archive. You'll use the path to it in the next step (see
``crypt_shared_lib_path``).

.. _qe-configuring-databases-setting:

Configuring the ``DATABASES`` setting
=====================================

In addition to the :ref:`database settings <configuring-databases-setting>`
required to use Django MongoDB Backend, Queryable Encryption requires
configuring a separate database connection that uses use PyMongo's
:class:`~pymongo.encryption_options.AutoEncryptionOpts`.

Here's a sample configuration using a local KMS provider::

    from pymongo.encryption_options import AutoEncryptionOpts

    DATABASES = {
        "default": {
            "ENGINE": "django_mongodb_backend",
            "HOST": "mongodb+srv://cluster0.example.mongodb.net",
            "NAME": "my_database",
            # ...
        },
        "encrypted": {
            "ENGINE": "django_mongodb_backend",
            "HOST": "mongodb+srv://cluster0.example.mongodb.net",
            "NAME": "encrypted",
            # ...
            "OPTIONS": {
                "auto_encryption_opts": AutoEncryptionOpts(
                    key_vault_namespace="encrypted.__keyVault",
                    kms_providers={
                        "local": {
                            # Generated by os.urandom(96)
                            "key": (
                                b'-\xc3\x0c\xe3\x93\xc3\x8b\xc0\xf8\x12\xc5#b'
                                b'\x19\xf3\xbc\xccR\xc8\xedI\xda\\ \xfb\x9cB'
                                b'\x7f\xab5\xe7\xb5\xc9x\xb8\xd4d\xba\xdc\x9c'
                                b'\x9a\xdb9J]\xe6\xce\x104p\x079q.=\xeb\x9dK*'
                                b'\x97\xea\xf8\x1e\xc3\xd49K\x18\x81\xc3\x1a"'
                                b'\xdc\x00U\xc4u"X\xe7xy\xa5\xb2\x0e\xbc\xd6+-'
                                b'\x80\x03\xef\xc2\xc4\x9bU'
                            )
                        },
                    },
                    # Exact file name depends on your operating system.
                    crypt_shared_lib_path="/path/to/mongo_crypt_v1.so",
                    crypt_shared_lib_required=True,
                )
            },
        },
    }

``key_vault_namespace`` specifies where to store the data encryption keys.
The database name of the key vault must be the same as in ``"NAME"``. The
vault's collection name can be whatever you wish, but by convention, it's often
``__keyVault``.

.. _qe-configuring-database-routers-setting:

Configuring the ``DATABASE_ROUTERS`` setting
============================================

Similar to configuring the :ref:`DATABASE_ROUTERS
<configuring-database-routers-setting>` setting for
:doc:`embedded models </topics/embedded-models>`, Queryable Encryption requires
a :setting:`DATABASE_ROUTERS` setting to route database operations to the
encrypted database.

The following example shows how to configure a router for the ``"myapp"``
application that routes database operations to the encrypted database for all
models in that application::

    # myapp/routers.py
    class EncryptedRouter:
        def allow_migrate(self, db, app_label, model_name=None, **hints):
            if app_label == "myapp":
                return db == "encrypted"
            # Prevent migrations on the encrypted database for other apps
            if db == "encrypted":
                return False
            return None

        def db_for_read(self, model, **hints):
            if model._meta.app_label == "myapp":
                return "encrypted"
            return None

        db_for_write = db_for_read

Then in your Django settings, add the custom database router to the
:setting:`django:DATABASE_ROUTERS` setting::

    # settings.py
    DATABASE_ROUTERS = [
        "django_mongodb_backend.routers.MongoRouter",
        "myapp.routers.EncryptedRouter",
    ]

Encrypted fields
================

Now you can start using encrypted fields in your Django models.

:doc:`Encrypted fields </ref/models/encrypted-fields>` may be used to protect
sensitive data like social security numbers, credit card information, or
personal health information. With Queryable Encryption, you can also perform
queries on encrypted fields. To use encrypted fields in your models,
import the necessary field types from ``django_mongodb_backend.models`` and
define your models as usual.

Here are models based on the `Python Queryable Encryption Tutorial`_::

    # myapp/models.py
    from django.db import models
    from django_mongodb_backend.models import EmbeddedModel
    from django_mongodb_backend.fields import (
        EmbeddedModelField,
        EncryptedCharField,
        EncryptedEmbeddedModelField,
    )


    class Patient(models.Model):
        name = models.CharField(max_length=255)
        patient_id = models.BigIntegerField()
        patient_record = EmbeddedModelField("PatientRecord")

        def __str__(self):
            return f"{self.name} ({self.patient_id})"


    class PatientRecord(EmbeddedModel):
        ssn = EncryptedCharField(max_length=11, queries={"queryType": "equality"})
        billing = EncryptedEmbeddedModelField("Billing")
        bill_amount = models.DecimalField(max_digits=10, decimal_places=2)


    class Billing(EmbeddedModel):
        cc_type = models.CharField(max_length=50)
        cc_number = models.CharField(max_length=20)

.. _Python Queryable Encryption Tutorial: https://github.com/mongodb/docs/tree/main/content/manual/manual/source/includes/qe-tutorials/python

.. _qe-migrations:

Migrations
==========

Once you have defined your models, create a migration as usual:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python manage.py makemigrations

Then run the migrations with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python manage.py migrate --database encrypted

.. warning::

    Be aware that MongoDB does not allow adding encrypted fields to existing
    collections, nor can you change the definition of an encrypted field, for
    example, to make it queryable. If you wish to add or change an encrypted
    field, you must create a new collection.

Creating encrypted data
=======================

Now create and manipulate instances of the data just like any other Django
model data. The fields will automatically handle encryption and decryption,
ensuring that :ref:`sensitive data is stored securely in the database
<manual:qe-features-encryption-at-rest>`.

Here's an example of creating a new ``Patient`` instance with encrypted fields:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> from myapp.models import Patient, PatientRecord, Billing
    >>> billing = Billing(cc_type="Visa", cc_number="4111111111111111")
    >>> record = PatientRecord(ssn="123-45-6789", billing=billing, bill_amount=250.75)
    >>> patient = Patient(name="John Doe", patient_id=1001, patient_record=record)
    >>> patient.save()

Querying encrypted fields
=========================

In order to query encrypted fields, you must include the :ref:`queries
<encrypted-fields-queries>` argument. For example, notice ``PatientRecord``\'s
``ssn`` field::

    class PatientRecord(EmbeddedModel):
        ssn = EncryptedCharField(max_length=11, queries={"queryType": "equality"})

You can perform a equality query just like you would on a non-encrypted field:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> patient = Patient.objects.get(patient_record__ssn="123-45-6789")
    >>> patient.name
    'John Doe'

.. _qe-configuring-kms:

Configuring the Key Management Service (KMS)
============================================

A local KMS provider with a hardcoded key is suitable for local development and
testing, but production environment, you should securely :ref:`store and manage
your encryption keys <manual:qe-fundamentals-kms-providers>`.

To use Queryable Encryption, you must configure a Key Management Service (KMS)
to store and manage the encryption keys used to encrypt and decrypt data.

There are two primary configuration points:

#. The ``kms_providers`` parameter of
   :class:`~pymongo.encryption_options.AutoEncryptionOpts` (see the
   ``kms_providers`` parameter in
   :class:`~pymongo.encryption_options.AutoEncryptionOpts` for the available
   providers (``aws``, ``azure``, ``gcp``, etc.) and provider options).

#. The :setting:`KMS_CREDENTIALS <DATABASE-KMS-CREDENTIALS>` inner option of
   :setting:`DATABASES`. The keys for each provider are documented under the
   ``master_key`` parameter of
   :meth:`~pymongo.encryption.ClientEncryption.create_data_key`.

Here's an example of KMS configuration with ``aws``::

    from pymongo.encryption_options import AutoEncryptionOpts

    DATABASES = {
        "encrypted": {
            # ...
            "OPTIONS": {
                "auto_encryption_opts": AutoEncryptionOpts(
                    # ...
                    kms_providers={
                        "aws": {
                            "accessKeyId": "your-access-key-id",
                            "secretAccessKey": "your-secret-access-key",
                        },
                    },
                ),
            },
            "KMS_CREDENTIALS": {
                "aws": {
                    "key": "...",  # Amazon Resource Name
                    "region": "...",  # AWS region
                },
            },
        },
    }

.. _qe-configuring-encrypted-fields-map:

Configuring the ``encrypted_fields_map`` option
===============================================

Encryption keys are created when you :ref:`run migrations for models that have
encrypted fields <qe-migrations>`.

To see the encrypted fields map for your models (which includes the encryption
key IDs), run the :djadmin:`showencryptedfieldsmap` command::

    $ python manage.py showencryptedfieldsmap --database encrypted

.. admonition:: Didn't work?

    If you get the error ``Unknown command: 'showencryptedfieldsmap'``, ensure
    ``"django_mongodb_backend"`` is in your :setting:`INSTALLED_APPS` setting.

It's recommended to include this map in your production settings to protect
against a malicious server advertising a false encrypted fields map::

    from bson import json_util
    from pymongo.encryption_options import AutoEncryptionOpts

    DATABASES = {
        "encrypted": {
            # ...
            "OPTIONS": {
                "auto_encryption_opts": AutoEncryptionOpts(
                    # ...
                    encrypted_fields_map=json_util.loads(
                        """{
                        "encrypt_patient": {
                            "fields": [
                                 {
                                     "bsonType": "string",
                                     "path": "patient_record.ssn",
                                     "keyId": {
                                          "$binary": {
                                              "base64": "2MA29LaARIOqymYHGmi2mQ==",
                                              "subType": "04"
                                          }
                                     },
                                     "queries": {
                                         "queryType": "equality"
                                     }
                                 },
                            ]
                        }}"""
                    ),
                ),
            },
        },
    }

Do not include this in your development and testing settings since the data
encryption will be different from those in your production database.

Typical deployment workflow
===========================

A typical development and deployment workflow for a project that uses Queryable
Encryption could be something like this:

#. Develop and test your project locally.
#. Deploy your project and run :djadmin:`migrate` to create the encrypted
   collections and data encryption keys.
#. Run :djadmin:`showencryptedfieldsmap` in production and :ref:`use the output
   <qe-configuring-encrypted-fields-map>` to set ``encrypted_fields_map`` in
   your production settings.
