============================
Django MongoDB Backend 6.0.x
============================

6.0.4
=====

*Unreleased*

New features
------------

- Added support for :ref:`window functions <django:window-functions>`.

- Added support for the following database functions:

  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.ExtractQuarter`
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.LPad`,
    :class:`~django.db.models.functions.RPad`
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.MD5` (requires MongoDB 8.3+)
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.Repeat`
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.Reverse`
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.Right`
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.SHA256` (requires MongoDB 8.3+)
  - :class:`~django.db.models.functions.Sign`

- Added support for the :class:`~django.db.models.StringAgg` aggregate.

- Added support for fixed-offset ``tzinfo`` in the
  :class:`~django.db.models.functions.Extract` database functions.

- Added support for the ``tzinfo`` parameter of the
  :class:`~django.db.models.functions.TruncDate` and
  :class:`~django.db.models.functions.TruncTime` database functions.

- Added support for Django's warning when performing import-time queries.

- Added support for pattern matching lookups (:lookup:`iexact`,
  :lookup:`startswith`, :lookup:`istartswith`, :lookup:`endswith`,
  :lookup:`iendswith`, :lookup:`contains`, :lookup:`icontains`,
  :lookup:`regex`, and :lookup:`iregex`) on
  :class:`~django.db.models.UUIDField`.

- Added support for :class:`~django.db.models.FilteredRelation`.

- Added the ``indexing_methods`` keyword argument to
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.indexes.VectorSearchIndex`, which allows
  specifying ``"hnsw"`` (server default) or ``"flat"`` for each vector field.

Bug fixes
---------

- Made creating models with expressions raise a helpful error message.

- Prevented :func:`~django_mongodb_backend.transaction.atomic` from silencing
  exceptions raised on commit.

- Added debug logging of ``QuerySet.explain()`` queries.

- Fixed crash when saving a model with
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.PolymorphicEmbeddedModelField` or
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.PolymorphicEmbeddedModelArrayField`
  that specifies ``embedded_models`` as a list of concrete models.

- Fixed queries for pattern matching lookups (:lookup:`iexact`,
  :lookup:`startswith`, :lookup:`istartswith`, :lookup:`endswith`,
  :lookup:`iendswith`, :lookup:`contains`, :lookup:`icontains`,
  :lookup:`regex`, and :lookup:`iregex`) on non-string fields.

- Fixed ``QuerySet.exclude()`` (and negated ``Q`` objects) on
  :class:`~django.db.models.JSONField` key lookups so that documents which
  don't contain the key are no longer included in the results.

- Fixed form rendering of
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.EmbeddedModelField`
  and :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.EmbeddedModelArrayField` so that
  a validation error is shown next to the subfield that caused it rather than
  being repeated on the parent field.

- Fixed crash when submitting a form that has an
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.EmbeddedModelField` to a model with a
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.EmbeddedModelArrayField`.

- Prevented aggregation queries from generating redundant accumulators in the
  ``$group`` stage.

- Made the :class:`~django.db.models.Sum` aggregation function return ``None``
  instead of ``0`` when no rows match, matching SQL semantics.

Backwards incompatible changes
------------------------------

- Subclasses of :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.models.EmbeddedModel` are now
  treated as unmanaged, that is they have the
  :attr:`~django.db.models.Options.managed` ``Meta`` option set to ``False``.

  Existing embedded models will have an ``AlterModelOptions`` migration
  operation added when you run :djadmin:`makemigrations`. Alternatively, you
  can edit your migrations and add ``'managed': False`` to each model's
  ``CreateModel`` operation under ``'abstract': False``:

  .. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 7

    operations = [
        migrations.CreateModel(
            name="...",
            fields=[...],
            options={
                "abstract": False,
                "managed": False,
            },
        ),
        ...,
    ]

- You must include ``'django_mongodb_backend'`` in the
  :setting:`INSTALLED_APPS` setting in order to generate migration operations
  for embedded models.

- Unique constraints are now created in a way that allows the MongoDB query
  planner to avoid a collection scan for queries of all built-in fields except
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.fields.ArrayField`,
  :class:`~django.db.models.BinaryField`, and
  :class:`~django.db.models.JSONField`. You'll have to drop and recreate
  constraints created using older versions of Django MongoDB Backend if you
  want to take advantage of this.

6.0.3
=====

*April 2, 2026*

New features
------------

- Added :ref:`support for matching ObjectIDs in URL patterns
  <object-id-in-url-patterns>`.

- Added polymorphic subfield support to
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.indexes.EmbeddedFieldIndex` and
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.constraints.EmbeddedFieldUniqueConstraint`.

  See :ref:`polymorphic-embedded-model-field-indexes`,
  :ref:`polymorphic-embedded-model-field-unique-constraints`,
  :ref:`polymorphic-embedded-model-array-field-indexes`, and
  :ref:`polymorphic-embedded-model-array-field-unique-constraints`.

- ``str(queryset.query)`` now outputs MQL instead of SQL.

Bug fixes
---------

- Made model saving raise an exception to prevent a misconfiguration from
  resulting in the creation of models with encrypted fields in non-encrypted
  databases.

- Made ``makemigrations`` serialize embedded model references as strings so
  that references in migrations don't need to be adjusted if models are later
  removed.

- Added a helpful ``NotSupportedError`` for ``QuerySet.extra(where=...)`` and
  ``StringAgg(..., distinct=True)`` rather than crashing with more obscure
  exceptions.

Deprecated features
-------------------

- Defining indexes and constraints on embedded models using ``unique=True``,
  ``db_index=True``, ``Meta.constraints``, ``Meta.indexes``, and
  ``Meta.unique_together`` is deprecated in favor of using
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.indexes.EmbeddedFieldIndex` and
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.constraints.EmbeddedFieldUniqueConstraint`
  on the top-level model. See :ref:`inline-constraints-and-indexes-deprecation`
  for an example.

6.0.2
=====

*February 5, 2026*

New features
------------

- Added support for :meth:`QuerySet.intersection()
  <django.db.models.query.QuerySet.intersection>` and
  :meth:`~django.db.models.query.QuerySet.difference`.
- Added support for :attr:`UniqueConstraint.nulls_distinct
  <django.db.models.UniqueConstraint.nulls_distinct>`. See
  :ref:`unique-constraints` for MongoDB-specific details.
- Added :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.indexes.EmbeddedFieldIndex` and
  :class:`~django_mongodb_backend.constraints.EmbeddedFieldUniqueConstraint`
  to index and create unique constraints on subfields of
  :class:`~.fields.EmbeddedModelField` and
  :class:`~.fields.EmbeddedModelArrayField`.

  See :ref:`embedded-model-field-indexes`,
  :ref:`embedded-model-field-unique-constraints`,
  :ref:`embedded-model-array-field-indexes`, and
  :ref:`embedded-model-array-field-unique-constraints`.

Bug fixes
---------

- Fixed ``Model.save()`` crash on existing models when using Queryable
  Encryption.

6.0.1
=====

*January 22, 2026*

New features
------------

- Added support for :doc:`Queryable Encryption </howto/queryable-encryption>`.
- Added support for :ref:`spatial lookups <spatial-lookups>`.

Bug fixes
---------

- Prevented ``Index`` system checks from running twice.
- Added exception messages to :class:`~django.db.DatabaseError` and
  :class:`~django.db.IntegrityError`.
- Fixed ``QuerySet.defer()`` and ``only()`` so that they project the correct
  fields. Previously, they had no effect.

Performance improvements
------------------------

- Removed usage of ``$facet`` from aggregate queries.

6.0.0
=====

*December 11, 2025*

Initial release from the state of :ref:`django-mongodb-backend 5.2.3
<django-mongodb-backend-5.2.3>`.

Regarding new features in Django 6.0, the :class:`django.db.models.StringAgg`
function isn't supported.

Backwards incompatible changes
------------------------------

- ``django_mongodb_backend.utils.parse_uri()`` is removed as per the
  :ref:`deprecation timeline <parse-uri-deprecation>`.
- The minimum supported version of MongoDB is increased from 6.0 to 7.0.
